[music playing]
NARRATOR: When a beautiful
young woman in Ohio
met a handsome young doctor,
it was love at first sight.
During candlelight
dinners, the two
spoke of marriage,
with the ceremony
on a distant beach at sunset.
But those plans
were delayed when
the prospective bride fell ill.
When medical science couldn't
find the cause of the problem,
forensic science and
a hidden camera did.
[music playing]
At 33 years old, Michelle
Baker was ready to settle down
get married and start a family.
Her dreams were soon realized
when a girlfriend introduced
her to a soft spoken
new doctor in town,
Dr. Maynard Muntzing II.
I was the happiest woman
in the world at that point.
I mean, he was
every woman's dream.
He was very successful,
very good looking.
NARRATOR: Michelle worked as
a firefighter and a paramedic,
and the two shared an interest
in emergency medicine.
Muntzing was also 33 years old.
Both were divorced, and there
was an immediate attraction.
Within a month,
Dr. Muntzing moved
into Michelle's small home
in Huber Heights, Ohio.
The couple spent weekends caring
for Maynard's two children
from a previous marriage.
And soon, Michelle had
some happy news of her own.
She was going to have a baby.
MICHELLE BAKER
(VOICEOVER): He said,
we're getting
married in Key West,
barefoot on the beach at sunset.
I was blown away.
NARRATOR: So the two
flew off to Florida.
But on their first night there,
Maynard changed his mind,
asking Michelle if they
could postpone the wedding
so his family could attend.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER):
I felt devastated.
I also felt like
if that is the way
that he wanted
things to be, that I
had to respect his wishes.
NARRATOR: Later that
night, the couple
went to the Hard Rock Cafe.
But after they left
the restaurant,
Michelle had severe cramps
and some light bleeding.
Fortunately, with a
fiance who was a doctor,
Maynard reassured her.
He told her there was
nothing to worry about.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER):
He just had me lay down.
He said that it was fine.
The next day, it stopped.
NARRATOR: After returning
home from vacation,
Michelle saw her physician,
Dr. John Shie, just
to make sure everything was OK.
JOHN M. SHIE, MD
(VOICEOVER): I'm
trying to allay her
concern, because I
don't think it's a big issue.
Michelle, I think, was primarily
concerned because of her age.
And this being her first
pregnancy, she was frightened.
Her concerns were that she had
a history of endometriosis,
and she thought that
might be a problem.
But I reassured her that the
chance of a problem was remote.
NARRATOR: Maynard
purchased this $320,000
brick house for the couple
to raise their new child.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER): It
was all very much a whirlwind,
as far as everything went.
The baby, the
romance, the just--
the unbelievable situation,
all the way around.
NARRATOR: But
Michelle's pregnancy
was a difficult one,
with increasing cramps
and occasionally, bleeding.
When neither in Michelle's
doctor or her fiance
could determine the
cause of her illness,
she did a little research of
her own and made her diagnosis.
It was a condition so
rare, medical experts
could hardly believe it.
[music playing]
Although Michelle Baker
and Dr. Maynard Muntzing
were expecting a child
and had plans to marry,
Maynard revealed some news
which threatened those plans.
He admitted he still
had lingering feelings
for a former
girlfriend, Tammy Irwin,
despite their stormy past.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER):
You have told all these people
such horrible things about her,
and what kind of person she is.
And I said, and you still
have feelings for her?
NARRATOR: Over the 4th
of July weekend in 2000,
Michelle planned to
stay home while Maynard
left for a fishing trip with
a friend about an hour's drive
away.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER):
We spent the morning together,
had a good morning, a
really good morning.
And he packed some
clothes and he left.
RADIO DJ: And with
"Prisoner of Love,"
here on all request hour, Q92.
Let's go to the request
lines, from Huber Heights.
Hello, what can I play for you?
MAYNARD MUNTZING (ON
RADIO): Yeah, I was
wondering if you could play--
NARRATOR: But later that
night, while listening
to a local radio
station, Michelle
heard a familiar voice
calling in to request a song.
MICHELLE BAKER
(VOICEOVER): The caller
sounded very much like Maynard.
And I was-- I just
stopped right there.
I just stopped dead in my
tracks, and I listened.
And the DJ asked him, he
said, well, who is this?
And he said, Maynard.
RADIO DJ: Do you want to
dedicate this to anyone?
MAYNARD MUNTZING (ON
RADIO): I'd like to--
NARRATOR: Now suspecting
she had been lied to,
Michelle asked a
neighbor to drive
her to the home of Maynard's
former girlfriend, Tammy Irwin.
And see, there they are.
NARRATOR: Michelle's
fears were confirmed when
she saw him outside with Tammy.
Fishing trip, huh?
It's not what it looks like.
It's exactly what
it looks like.
NARRATOR: A
confrontation ensued.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER):
She never knew that Maynard
was living with me.
He had told her that he was
living with a friend of his.
And all the while,
he was with me.
NARRATOR: Michelle immediately
threw Maynard out of her home.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER):
I was devastated.
I just couldn't believe that
someone could be that deceiving
and appear to be something
that they're obviously not.
NARRATOR: But a few
days later, Maynard
called inviting Michelle to a
picnic so the two could talk.
He apologized for
his lapse in judgment
and asked Michele if they
could get back together.
MICHELLE BAKER
(VOICEOVER): He turned to
and he said that he was very
sorry about all of this.
Seemed very sincere
in what he was saying.
NARRATOR: But the
picnic was interrupted
when Michelle got very sick.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER): I
was so ill there at the park
that I couldn't even leave.
I would leave the restroom
and then five minutes later,
have to be right
back in the restroom.
Not only was I vomiting
and bad diarrhea,
but I also about 40
minutes into this
started bleeding, and
bleeding pretty bad.
NARRATOR: Michelle immediately
went to her doctor.
He could find nothing
seriously wrong.
An ultrasound of the
fetus was normal,
and once again, Michelle
assumed her symptoms
were stress related.
With their relationship
back on track,
the couple once again
spoke of marriage.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER):
He was affectionate
and he rubbed my back,
watched TV with me
and it seemed very normal.
NARRATOR: But it happened again.
Michelle started cramping,
bleeding, and vomiting.
JOHN M. SHIE, MD
(VOICEOVER): I thought
that this was due to anxiety
and stress, and probably
just internal pressure
that developed
when she saw her boyfriend.
NARRATOR: But it was Michelle's
twin sister Melinda who noticed
an interesting coincidence.
She had said that,
don't you find it odd
that every time you're with him,
after he leaves, you're sick?
And I was just horrified
by what she was implying.
NARRATOR: Michelle recalled that
Maynard was the one who brought
the drinks from the bar
to their table in Florida,
shortly before she fell
ill the first time.
And he also prepared
her drink at the picnic
before the second
bleeding incident.
But what was he
doing to her drinks?
To find out, she
set a trap and was
clever enough to videotape it.
[music playing]
Michelle Baker was becoming
increasingly suspicious
of her fiance's behavior.
Maynard told Michele he was
taking his children to Florida
for a short vacation.
Michelle suspected he was lying.
To find out, Michelle
drove to the home
of Maynard's ex-girlfriend
and there saw Maynard's car.
Through an open window,
Michelle overheard
Maynard and Tammy
Irwin discussing
Michelle's pregnancy.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER):
Tammy asked Maynard what he
intended to do about the baby.
And Maynard's
response to her was,
she need not worry
about that, that as
far as he knew, that it
could have already been taken
care of.
My heart dropped.
And it was at that point that
I realized that something
might be going on.
NARRATOR: Michelle immediately
told police about her suspicion
that Maynard was trying
to abort their child.
DET.
JEFFREY F. COLVIN
(VOICEOVER): Well,
after listening to the story, I
thought it was quite fantastic.
It's not the typical case
that comes across my desk.
I was certainly skeptical
at first, and thought,
I can't imagine that
someone would even do this.
It's beyond my dreams.
Something I haven't run into
in 25 years of experience.
Is he still trying
to like contact--
NARRATOR: Police wanted Michelle
to take a lie detector test,
but department rules
prohibit the test
to be done on pregnant women.
DET.
SGT. RICHARD MAY
(VOICEOVER): We told her,
basically that because of
his professional position
that we were going to need
all types of physical evidence
that would show that he's
responsible for this.
NARRATOR: But
without proof, there
was little police could do.
So Michelle conducted
her own investigation.
Inside a silk plant,
Michelle and her girlfriend
hid a small video
camera in her kitchen
with a clear view of the
kitchen countertop area.
MICHELLE BAKER
(VOICEOVER): I was scared.
I was afraid that
he would see it.
NARRATOR: She then
invited Maynard to dinner.
As soon as he arrived, Michelle
said she was going outside
to put the steaks on
the grill and asked
Maynard to prepare her a drink.
The videotape clearly
revealed Maynard
pouring an unknown substance
into Michelle's soft drink.
When he handed
Michelle the drink,
she excused herself to go
to the bathroom, where she
had hidden a plastic container.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER):
As I poured that drink
into that container, there was
a white sludge in the bottom
of my cup, an enormous amount.
I mean, not just a little
bit, but a very large amount.
And then I rinsed my cup out.
I poured my new Coke into that
glass, hid the other stuff.
I walked back out and
sat down at the table
and ate dinner with him.
I was sickened, but I knew
that this was the only way
that I could prove this.
This was the only
way that I could
keep him away from my baby.
NARRATOR: Getting through
dinner was difficult.
Michelle wanted to get the
drink to the police station
quickly, and throughout dinner,
her telephone rang incessantly.
It was Tammy Irwin, asking
to speak with Maynard.
When Maynard finally left,
the telephone rang once more.
It was Maynard, with
some upsetting news.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER): He
said to me, do you want to know
why Tammy's is so upset?
And I said, yeah, why don't you
tell me why Tammy's so upset.
He said, because she's my wife.
He married her that week.
NARRATOR: The police immediately
sent Michelle's soft drink
to the forensics lab.
MIKE WATHEN (VOICEOVER):
My first reaction
is, you gotta be kidding me.
We have no idea what
we're looking for here.
It's not a typical
forensic case.
So where are we
going to even start?
There's literally hundreds
of drugs that this could be.
NARRATOR: On a hunch, police
called a local pharmacist
asking for a list of medications
that can cause harm to a fetus
if taken by a pregnant woman.
The most commonly
prescribed drug
fitting that description was
a stomach ulcer drug, cytotec.
The contents of
Michelle's soft drink
were placed in a
gas chromatograph
mass spectrometer.
The chromatograph separates
the various elements.
The mass spectrometer
analyzes them.
MIKE WATHEN (VOICEOVER): By
comparing the known cytotec
that we received from the
pharmaceutical company,
we compared that
to the substance
that was found in the
Coca-Cola and found a match.
Therefore, the Coca-Cola
contained cytotec.
KIM MELNICK
(VOICEOVER): It's also
a drug that is used in
a very limited capacity
to induce labor.
The actual effects of
that particular drug
are to actually
start contractions.
NARRATOR: But police
had a problem.
There was no proof it was
cytotec that Maynard was
putting into the soft drink.
A clever defense
attorney could claim
that Michelle laced her
own drink with the drug
in order to frame him.
So police set a
trap of their own.
[music playing]
Even though Michelle Baker had
caught her fiance on videotape
placing something in
her drink, authorities
were concerned about
whether this evidence
would stand up in court.
DET.
JEFFREY F. COLVIN (VOICEOVER):
We didn't believe just
having a tape by the complainant
and a sample by the complainant
would have as much validity
as a tape by ourselves
obtained by ourselves, and the
sample obtained by ourselves.
NARRATOR: So a few
days later, police
set up their own surveillance
camera in Michelle's kitchen.
They placed it in a figurine of
a firefighter saving a child.
The camera focused on
Michelle's kitchen counter.
Once again, Michelle invited
Maynard over for dinner.
DET.
JEFFREY F. COLVIN (VOICEOVER):
Myself and Detective
Sergeant May were
waiting in the garage,
and viewing what was
going on in the kitchen.
Like clockwork, almost
identical to the previous tape,
once Michelle Baker exited
the residence to put steaks
on the grill, Dr. Muntzing
removed a vial from his pocket
and placed it in her drink.
Let's get him.
NARRATOR: The two detectives
rushed into the kitchen
and arrested him.
How are you doing?
We're police officers.
Put your hands up. [inaudible].
DET.
SGT. RICHARD MAY
(VOICEOVER): At that time,
I pointed up to the
camera and said,
right up there,
you're on camera.
And that's when he viewed
the camera, to look at it.
I said, I told you that you
didn't have to have anything
to do with this baby,
and instead you tried
to kill the baby and kill me.
DET.
SGT. RICHARD MAY (VOICEOVER):
I mean this guy, had it all.
In a matter of six minutes,
he destroyed his career,
and of course, Michelle's life.
NARRATOR: Dr.
Muntzing cryptically
explained why he had done it.
DET.
JEFFREY F. COLVIN
(VOICEOVER): He'd
basically poisoned the
drink in an attempt
to remove the problem.
When questioned as to whether or
not the problem meant the baby,
he advised yes.
NARRATOR: Lab tests
confirmed that this drink
was spiked with cytotec, too.
A search of Muntzing's car trunk
revealed even more cytotec.
Dr. Maynard Muntzing was
charged with the attempted
murder of the baby.
JOHN M. SHIE, MD (VOICEOVER):
I think that's just despicable.
I am ashamed to say
that he's a physician.
I think that he misused his
authority and his ability
to obtain a substance, and
then he poisoned his ex-fiance.
NARRATOR: Despite ingesting
cytotec several times earlier,
Michelle's fetus
appeared normal.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER):
I was the doctor's
office every week,
had high resolution
ultrasounds every month.
They were very, very cautious as
to what they were looking for.
NARRATOR: Meanwhile,
Muntzing was released
on bond to await trial.
NARRATOR: Shortly
before the trial,
28 weeks into her
pregnancy, Michelle
gave birth to a stillborn baby
girl, whom she named Mckayla.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER):
She was already gone.
It was a bad day.
And my parents got
there, and they were
there when she was delivered.
My whole family was
there, and my friends.
And they all held her,
and we passed her around.
And we all told her how
much that we loved her.
NARRATOR: Since the coroner
found no trace of cytotec
in the placenta, he ruled
the cause of the baby's
death as undetermined.
He did make oral statements
as well as written statements
admitting to what he was
trying to do in this case,
and that he was trying
to get rid of the baby,
that it was something
his wife didn't
want him to have to deal with.
NARRATOR: Michelle
firmly believes
that Maynard was responsible.
MICHELLE BAKER
(VOICEOVER): And I
know in my heart
for what he did,
my justice is knowing
that he is eventually
going to be judged for that.
NARRATOR: Because of the strain
a trial would have placed
on Michelle and her family,
prosecutors made a deal
with Dr. Muntzing
and his wife, Tammy,
with Michelle's approval.
Muntzing's wife Tammy
pleaded guilty to the charge
of filling the prescription
for the cytotec.
She was put on probation.
Dr. Muntzing pleaded guilty
to contaminating a substance
for human consumption and
attempted felonious assault.
He was sentenced to
five years in prison.
He was also stripped
of his medical license,
and will never be permitted
to practice medicine
in the United States again.
MICHELLE BAKER (VOICEOVER):
I have a lot of anger
and a lot of hurt, and
a lot of questions.
And it doesn't matter how
much counseling I go to.
They can't answer any
of those questions.
And it's difficult.
NARRATOR: Michelle
keeps Mckayla's ashes
in a beautiful acrylic
statue, surrounded by angels.
Fortunately, it was Michelle's
suspicions, good police work,
and new forensic technology that
identified the drug quickly.
MIKE WATHEN (VOICEOVER): It
could have been a very, very
long procedure identifying
this drug, because we
literally had no
idea where to start
or what we were looking for.
It could have taken
us several months
to determine what we had.
NARRATOR: A delay
of several months
may have prevented police
from capturing the crime
a second time on videotape.
[music playing]